name: Alpha-mannosidosis
ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/alpha-mannosidosis
text/text-role: description
text/html/html:p(1): Alpha-mannosidosis is a rare inherited disorder that causes problems in many organs and tissues of the body. Affected individuals may have intellectual disability, distinctive facial features, and skeletal abnormalities. Characteristic facial features can include a large head, prominent forehead, low hairline, rounded eyebrows, large ears, flattened bridge of the nose, protruding jaw, widely spaced teeth, overgrown gums, and large tongue. The skeletal abnormalities that can occur in this disorder include reduced bone density (osteopenia), thickening of the bones at the top of the skull (calvaria), deformations of the bones in the spine (vertebrae), bowed legs or knock knees, and deterioration of the bones and joints.
text/html/html:p(2): Affected individuals may also experience difficulty in coordinating movements (ataxia); muscle weakness (myopathy); delay in developing motor skills such as sitting and walking; speech impairments; increased risk of infections; enlargement of the liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly); a buildup of fluid in the brain (hydrocephalus); hearing loss; and a clouding of the lens of the eye (cataract). Some people with alpha-mannosidosis experience psychiatric symptoms such as depression, anxiety, or hallucinations; episodes of psychiatric disturbance may be triggered by stressors such as having undergone surgery, emotional upset, or changes in routine.
text/html/html:p(3): The signs and symptoms of alpha-mannosidosis can range from mild to severe. The disorder may appear in infancy with rapid progression and severe neurological deterioration. Individuals with this early-onset form of alpha-mannosidosis often do not survive past childhood. In the most severe cases, an affected fetus may die before birth. Other individuals with alpha-mannosidosis experience milder signs and symptoms that appear later and progress more slowly. People with later-onset alpha-mannosidosis may survive into their fifties. The mildest cases may be detected only through laboratory testing and result in few if any symptoms.
inheritance-pattern/code: ar
inheritance-pattern/memo: autosomal recessive
related-gene/gene-symbol: MAN2B1
related-gene/ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/MAN2B1
synonym(1): alpha-D-mannosidosis
synonym(2): alpha-mannosidase B deficiency
synonym(3): alpha-mannosidase deficiency
synonym(4): deficiency of alpha-mannosidase
synonym(5): lysosomal alpha B mannosidosis
synonym(6): lysosomal alpha-D-mannosidase deficiency
synonym(7): mannosidosis
db-key(1)/db: GTR
db-key(1)/key: C0024748
db-key(2)/db: GeneReviews
db-key(2)/key: a-mannosidosis
db-key(3)/db: MeSH
db-key(3)/key: D008363
db-key(4)/db: OMIM
db-key(4)/key: 248500
db-key(5)/db: Orphanet
db-key(5)/key: 61
db-key(6)/db: SNOMED CT
db-key(6)/key: 124466001
reviewed: 2014-05
published: 2018-04-17
