name: Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease
ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/biotin-thiamine-responsive-basal-ganglia-disease
text/text-role: description
text/html/html:p(1): Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease is a disorder that affects the nervous system, including a group of structures in the brain called the basal ganglia, which help control movement. As its name suggests, the condition may improve if the vitamins biotin and thiamine are given as treatment. Without early and lifelong vitamin treatment, people with biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease experience a variety of neurological problems that gradually get worse. The occurrence of specific neurological problems and their severity vary even among affected individuals within the same family.
text/html/html:p(2): The signs and symptoms of biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease usually begin between the ages of 3 and 10, but the disorder can appear at any age. Many of the neurological problems that can occur in biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease affect movement, and can include involuntary tensing of various muscles (dystonia), muscle rigidity, muscle weakness on one or both sides of the body (hemiparesis or quadriparesis), problems coordinating movements (ataxia), and exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia). Movement problems can also affect the face, and may include the inability to move facial muscles due to facial nerve paralysis (supranuclear facial palsy), paralysis of the eye muscles (external ophthalmoplegia), difficulty chewing or swallowing (dysphagia), and slurred speech. Affected individuals may also experience confusion, loss of previously learned skills, intellectual disability, and seizures. Severe cases may result in coma and become life-threatening.
text/html/html:p(3): Typically, the neurological symptoms occur as increasingly severe episodes, which may be triggered by fever, injury, or other stresses on the body. Less commonly, the signs and symptoms persist at the same level or slowly increase in severity over time rather than occurring as episodes that come and go. In these individuals, the neurological problems are usually limited to dystonia, seizure disorders, and delay in the development of mental and motor skills (psychomotor delay).
inheritance-pattern/code: ar
inheritance-pattern/memo: autosomal recessive
related-gene/gene-symbol: SLC19A3
related-gene/ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/SLC19A3
synonym(1): BBGD
synonym(2): biotin-responsive basal ganglia disease
synonym(3): BTBGD
synonym(4): thiamine metabolism dysfunction syndrome 2
synonym(5): thiamine-responsive encephalopathy
synonym(6): thiamine transporter-2 deficiency
synonym(7): THMD2
db-key(1)/db: GTR
db-key(1)/key: C1843807
db-key(2)/db: GeneReviews
db-key(2)/key: bgd-biotin
db-key(3)/db: MeSH
db-key(3)/key: D001480
db-key(4)/db: OMIM
db-key(4)/key: 607483
db-key(5)/db: SNOMED CT
db-key(5)/key: 703522009
reviewed: 2014-01
published: 2018-04-17
