name: Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome
ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/branchio-oculo-facial-syndrome
text/text-role: description
text/html/html:p(1): Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome is a condition that affects development before birth, particularly of structures in the face and neck. Its characteristic features include skin anomalies on the neck, malformations of the eyes and ears, and distinctive facial features.
text/html/html:p(2): "Branchio-" refers to the branchial arches, which are structures in the developing embryo that give rise to tissues in the face and neck. In people with branchio-oculo-facial syndrome, the first and second branchial arches do not develop properly, leading to abnormal patches of skin, typically on the neck or near the ears. These patches can be unusually thin, hairy, or red and densely packed with blood vessels (hemangiomatous). In a small number of individuals, tissue from a gland called the thymus is abnormally located on the skin of the neck (dermal thymus). Problems with branchial arch development underlie many of the other features of branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.
text/html/html:p(3): "Oculo-" refers to the eyes. Many people with branchio-oculo-facial syndrome have malformations of the eyes that can lead to vision impairment. These abnormalities include unusually small eyeballs (microphthalmia), no eyeballs (anophthalmia), a gap or split in structures that make up the eyes (coloboma), or blockage of the tear ducts (nasolacrimal duct stenosis).
text/html/html:p(4): Problems with development of the face lead to distinctive facial features in people with branchio-oculo-facial syndrome. Many affected individuals have a split in the upper lip (cleft lip) or a pointed upper lip that resembles a poorly repaired cleft lip (often called a pseudocleft lip) with or without an opening in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate). Other facial characteristics include widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), an increased distance between the inner corners of the eyes (telecanthus), outside corners of the eyes that point upward (upslanting palpebral fissures), a broad nose with a flattened tip, and weakness of the muscles in the lower face. The ears are also commonly affected, resulting in malformed or prominent ears. Abnormalities of the inner ear or of the tiny bones in the ears (ossicles) can cause hearing loss in people with this condition.
text/html/html:p(5): Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome can affect other structures and tissues as well. Some affected individuals have kidney abnormalities, such as malformed kidneys or multiple kidney cysts. Nail and teeth abnormalities also occur, and some people with this condition have prematurely graying hair.
inheritance-pattern/code: ad
inheritance-pattern/memo: autosomal dominant
related-gene/gene-symbol: TFAP2A
related-gene/ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/TFAP2A
synonym(1): BOFS
synonym(2): branchial clefts with characteristic facies, growth retardation, imperforate nasolacrimal duct, and premature aging
synonym(3): hemangiomatous branchial clefts-lip pseudocleft syndrome
synonym(4): lip pseudocleft-hemagiomatous branchial cyst syndrome
db-key(1)/db: GTR
db-key(1)/key: C0376524
db-key(2)/db: GeneReviews
db-key(2)/key: bofs
db-key(3)/db: MeSH
db-key(3)/key: D019465
db-key(4)/db: OMIM
db-key(4)/key: 113620
db-key(5)/db: Orphanet
db-key(5)/key: 1297
db-key(6)/db: SNOMED CT
db-key(6)/key: 449821007
reviewed: 2012-09
published: 2018-04-17
