name: Hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy
ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/hereditary-neuralgic-amyotrophy
text/text-role: description
text/html/html:p(1): Hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy is a disorder characterized by episodes of severe pain and muscle wasting (amyotrophy) in one or both shoulders and arms. Neuralgic pain is felt along the path of one or more nerves and often has no obvious physical cause. The network of nerves involved in hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy, called the brachial plexus, controls movement and sensation in the shoulders and arms.
text/html/html:p(2): People with hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy usually begin experiencing attacks in their twenties, but episodes have occurred as early as the age of 1 year in some individuals. The attacks may be spontaneous or triggered by stress such as strenuous exercise, childbirth, surgery, exposure to cold, infections, immunizations, or emotional disturbance. While the frequency of the episodes tends to decrease with age, affected individuals are often left with residual problems, such as chronic pain and impaired movement, that accumulate over time.
text/html/html:p(3): Typically an attack begins with severe pain on one or both sides of the body; right-sided involvement is most common. The pain may be difficult to control with medication and usually lasts about a month. Within a period of time ranging from a few hours to a couple of weeks, the muscles in the affected area begin to weaken and waste away (atrophy), and movement becomes difficult. Muscle wasting may cause changes in posture or in the appearance of the shoulder, back, and arm. In particular, weak shoulder muscles tend to make the shoulder blades (scapulae) "stick out" from the back, a common sign known as scapular winging. Additional features of hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy may include decreased sensation (hypoesthesia) and abnormal sensations in the skin such as numbness or tingling (paresthesias). Areas other than the shoulder and arm may also be involved.
text/html/html:p(4): In a few affected families, individuals with hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy also have unusual physical characteristics including short stature, excess skin folds on the neck and arms, an opening in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), a split in the soft flap of tissue that hangs from the back of the mouth (bifid uvula), and partially webbed or fused fingers or toes (partial syndactyly). They may also have distinctive facial features including eyes set close together (ocular hypotelorism), a narrow opening of the eyelids (short palpebral fissures) with a skin fold covering the inner corner of the eye (epicanthal fold), a long nasal bridge, a narrow mouth, and differences between one side of the face and the other (facial asymmetry).
inheritance-pattern/code: ad
inheritance-pattern/memo: autosomal dominant
related-gene/gene-symbol: SEPT9
related-gene/ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/SEPT9
synonym(1): Amyotrophic Neuralgia
synonym(2): Brachial Neuralgia
synonym(3): Brachial Neuritis
synonym(4): Brachial Plexus Neuritis
synonym(5): familial brachial plexus neuritis
synonym(6): hereditary brachial plexus neuropathy
synonym(7): heredofamilial neuritis with brachial plexus predilection
synonym(8): HNA
synonym(9): NAPB
synonym(10): Neuralgic Amyotrophy
synonym(11): neuritis with brachial predilection
synonym(12): Shoulder Girdle Neuropathy
db-key(1)/db: GTR
db-key(1)/key: C1834304
db-key(2)/db: GeneReviews
db-key(2)/key: hna
db-key(3)/db: ICD-10-CM
db-key(3)/key: G54.5
db-key(4)/db: MeSH
db-key(4)/key: D020968
db-key(5)/db: OMIM
db-key(5)/key: 162100
db-key(6)/db: Orphanet
db-key(6)/key: 2901
db-key(7)/db: SNOMED CT
db-key(7)/key: 26609002
reviewed: 2009-09
published: 2018-04-17
