name: Poland syndrome
ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/poland-syndrome
text/text-role: description
text/html/html:p(1): Poland syndrome is a disorder in which affected individuals are born with missing or underdeveloped muscles on one side of the body, resulting in abnormalities that can affect the chest, shoulder, arm, and hand. The extent and severity of the abnormalities vary among affected individuals.
text/html/html:p(2): People with Poland syndrome are typically missing part of one of the major chest muscles, called the pectoralis major. In most affected individuals, the missing part is the large section of the muscle that normally runs from the upper arm to the breastbone (sternum). The abnormal pectoralis major muscle may cause the chest to appear concave. In some cases, additional muscles on the affected side of the torso, including muscles in the chest wall, side, and shoulder, may be missing or underdeveloped. There may also be rib cage abnormalities, such as shortened ribs, and the ribs may be noticeable due to less fat under the skin (subcutaneous fat). Breast and nipple abnormalities may also occur, and underarm (axillary) hair is sometimes sparse or abnormally placed. In most cases, the abnormalities in the chest area do not cause health problems or affect movement.
text/html/html:p(3): Many people with Poland syndrome have hand abnormalities on the affected side, commonly including an underdeveloped hand with abnormally short fingers (brachydactyly); small, underdeveloped (vestigial) fingers; and some fingers that are fused together (syndactyly). This combination of hand abnormalities is called symbrachydactyly.  Some affected individuals have only one or two of these features, or have a mild hand abnormality that is hardly noticeable; more severe abnormalities can cause problems with use of the hand. The bones of the forearm (radius and ulna) are shortened in some people with Poland syndrome, but this shortening may also be difficult to detect unless measured.
text/html/html:p(4): Mild cases of Poland syndrome without hand involvement may not be evident until puberty, when the differences (asymmetry) between the two sides of the chest become more apparent. By contrast, severely affected individuals have abnormalities of the chest, hand, or both that are apparent at birth. In rare cases, severely affected individuals have abnormalities of internal organs such as a lung or a kidney, or the heart is abnormally located in the right side of the chest (dextrocardia).
text/html/html:p(5): Rarely, chest and hand abnormalities resembling those of Poland syndrome occur on both sides of the body, but researchers disagree as to whether this condition is a variant of Poland syndrome or a different disorder.
inheritance-pattern/code: u
inheritance-pattern/memo: pattern unknown
synonym(1): Poland anomaly
synonym(2): Poland sequence
synonym(3): Poland syndactyly
synonym(4): Poland's anomaly
synonym(5): Poland's syndrome
synonym(6): unilateral defect of pectoralis major and syndactyly of the hand
db-key(1)/db: GTR
db-key(1)/key: C0032357
db-key(2)/db: MeSH
db-key(2)/key: D011045
db-key(3)/db: OMIM
db-key(3)/key: 173800
db-key(4)/db: Orphanet
db-key(4)/key: 2911
db-key(5)/db: SNOMED CT
db-key(5)/key: 38371006
reviewed: 2016-04
published: 2018-04-17
