name: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome
ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/shwachman-diamond-syndrome
text/text-role: description
text/html/html:p(1): Shwachman-Diamond syndrome is an inherited condition that affects many parts of the body, particularly the bone marrow, pancreas, and skeletal system.
text/html/html:p(2): The major function of bone marrow is to produce new blood cells.  These include red blood cells, which carry oxygen to the body's tissues; white blood cells, which fight infection; and platelets, which are blood cell fragments that are necessary for normal blood clotting.  In Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, the bone marrow malfunctions and does not make some or all types of white blood cells.  A shortage of neutrophils, the most common type of white blood cell, causes a condition called neutropenia.  Most people with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome have at least occasional episodes of neutropenia, which makes them more vulnerable to infections such as pneumonia, recurrent ear infections (otitis media), and skin infections.  Less commonly, bone marrow abnormalities lead to a shortage of red blood cells (anemia), which causes fatigue and weakness, or a reduction in the amount of platelets (thrombocytopenia), which can result in easy bruising and abnormal bleeding.
text/html/html:p(3): People with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome have an increased risk of several serious complications related to their malfunctioning bone marrow. Specifically, they have a higher-than-average chance of developing myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and aplastic anemia, which are disorders that affect blood cell production, and a cancer of blood-forming tissue known as acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
text/html/html:p(4): Shwachman-Diamond syndrome also affects the pancreas, which is an organ that plays an essential role in digestion. One of this organ's main functions is to produce enzymes that help break down and use the nutrients from food.  In most infants with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, the pancreas does not produce enough of these enzymes.  This condition is known as pancreatic insufficiency.  Infants with pancreatic insufficiency have trouble digesting food and absorbing nutrients that are needed for growth.  As a result, they often have fatty, foul-smelling stools (steatorrhea); are slow to grow and gain weight (failure to thrive); and experience malnutrition.  Pancreatic insufficiency often improves with age in people with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome.
text/html/html:p(5): Skeletal abnormalities are another common feature of Shwachman-Diamond syndrome.  Many affected individuals have problems with bone formation and growth, most often affecting the hips and knees.  Low bone density is also frequently associated with this condition.  Some infants are born with a narrow rib cage and short ribs, which can cause life-threatening problems with breathing.  The combination of skeletal abnormalities and slow growth results in short stature in most people with this disorder.
text/html/html:p(6): The complications of this condition can affect several other parts of the body, including the liver, heart, endocrine system (which produces hormones), eyes, teeth, and skin.  Additionally, studies suggest that Shwachman-Diamond syndrome may be associated with delayed speech and the delayed development of motor skills such as sitting, standing, and walking.
inheritance-pattern/code: ar
inheritance-pattern/memo: autosomal recessive
related-gene/gene-symbol: SBDS
related-gene/ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/SBDS
synonym(1): Congenital Lipomatosis of Pancreas
synonym(2): Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, Shwachman type
synonym(3): SDS
synonym(4): Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome
synonym(5): Shwachman-Bodian syndrome
synonym(6): Shwachman-Diamond-Oski Syndrome
synonym(7): Shwachman syndrome
db-key(1)/db: GTR
db-key(1)/key: C0272170
db-key(2)/db: GeneReviews
db-key(2)/key: sds
db-key(3)/db: MeSH
db-key(3)/key: D001855
db-key(4)/db: MeSH
db-key(4)/key: D010188
db-key(5)/db: OMIM
db-key(5)/key: 260400
db-key(6)/db: Orphanet
db-key(6)/key: 811
db-key(7)/db: SNOMED CT
db-key(7)/key: 89454001
reviewed: 2007-12
published: 2018-04-17
