name: Sjögren-Larsson syndrome
ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/sjogren-larsson-syndrome
text/text-role: description
text/html/html:p(1): Sjögren-Larsson syndrome is a condition characterized by dry, scaly skin (ichthyosis); neurological problems; and eye problems. These symptoms are apparent by early childhood and usually do not worsen with age.
text/html/html:p(2): Affected infants tend to be born prematurely. At birth the skin is red (erythema), but later in infancy the skin becomes dry, rough, and scaly with a brownish or yellowish tone. Mild to severe itchiness (pruritus) is also common. These skin abnormalities are generally dispersed over the whole body, most severely affecting the nape of the neck, the torso, and the extremities. The skin of the face is usually not affected.
text/html/html:p(3): People with this condition may also have neurological signs and symptoms. Most affected individuals have leukoencephalopathy, which is a change in a type of brain tissue called white matter. White matter consists of nerve fibers covered by a substance (myelin) that insulates and protects the nerves. The leukoencephalopathy is thought to contribute to many of the neurological signs and symptoms in people with Sjögren-Larsson syndrome. Most affected individuals have intellectual disability that varies from mild to profound and is usually apparent by early childhood. People with Sjögren-Larsson syndrome have speech difficulties (dysarthria) and delayed speech. Usually they are able to produce only short sentences with poorly formed words. Rarely, people with this condition have normal intelligence. In addition, approximately 40 percent of people with Sjögren-Larsson syndrome have seizures.
text/html/html:p(4): Children with this condition often experience delayed development of motor skills (such as crawling and walking) due to abnormal muscle stiffness (spasticity) that is typically in their legs and, less commonly, also in their arms. About one-half of people with Sjögren-Larsson syndrome require wheelchair assistance and many others need some form of support to walk.
text/html/html:p(5): Affected individuals have tiny crystals in the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (retina) that can be seen during an eye exam. Based on their appearance, these retinal crystals are often called glistening white dots. These white dots are usually apparent by early childhood, and it is unclear if they affect normal vision. People with Sjögren-Larsson syndrome may also have nearsightedness (myopia) or an increased sensitivity to light (photophobia).
inheritance-pattern/code: ar
inheritance-pattern/memo: autosomal recessive
related-gene/gene-symbol: ALDH3A2
related-gene/ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/ALDH3A2
synonym(1): congenital icthyosis mental retardation spasticity syndrome
synonym(2): FALDH deficiency
synonym(3): fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase deficiency
synonym(4): ichthyosis oligophrenia syndrome
synonym(5): Sjogren-Larsson syndrome
synonym(6): SLS
db-key(1)/db: GTR
db-key(1)/key: C0037231
db-key(2)/db: MeSH
db-key(2)/key: D016111
db-key(3)/db: OMIM
db-key(3)/key: 270200
db-key(4)/db: SNOMED CT
db-key(4)/key: 111303009
reviewed: 2011-10
published: 2018-04-17
