name: Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1
ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/spinal-muscular-atrophy-with-respiratory-distress-type-1
text/text-role: description
text/html/html:p(1): Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1) is an inherited condition that causes muscle weakness and respiratory failure typically beginning in infancy. Early features of this condition are difficult and noisy breathing, especially when inhaling; a weak cry; problems feeding; and recurrent episodes of pneumonia. Typically between the ages of 6 weeks and 6 months, infants with this condition will experience a sudden inability to breathe due to paralysis of the muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest cavity (the diaphragm). Normally, the diaphragm contracts and moves downward during inhalation to allow the lungs to expand. With diaphragm paralysis, affected individuals require life-long support with a machine to help them breathe (mechanical ventilation). Rarely, children with SMARD1 develop signs or symptoms of the disorder later in childhood.
text/html/html:p(2): Soon after respiratory failure occurs, individuals with SMARD1 develop muscle weakness in their distal muscles. These are the muscles farther from the center of the body, such as muscles in the hands and feet. The weakness soon spreads to all muscles; however, within 2 years, the muscle weakness typically stops getting worse. Some individuals may retain a low level of muscle function, while others lose all ability to move their muscles.  Muscle weakness severely impairs motor development, such as sitting, standing, and walking. Some affected children develop an abnormal side-to-side and back-to-front curvature of the spine (scoliosis and kyphosis, often called kyphoscoliosis when they occur together). After approximately the first year of life, individuals with SMARD1 may lose their deep tendon reflexes, such as the reflex being tested when a doctor taps the knee with a hammer.
text/html/html:p(3): Other features of SMARD1 can include reduced pain sensitivity, excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis), loss of bladder and bowel control, and an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia).
inheritance-pattern/code: ar
inheritance-pattern/memo: autosomal recessive
related-gene/gene-symbol: IGHMBP2
related-gene/ghr-page: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/IGHMBP2
synonym(1): autosomal recessive distal spinal muscular atrophy 1
synonym(2): DHMN6
synonym(3): diaphragmatic spinal muscular atrophy
synonym(4): distal hereditary motor neuronopathy type VI
synonym(5): distal spinal muscular atrophy type 1
synonym(6): DSMA1
synonym(7): HMN6
synonym(8): HMNVI
synonym(9): severe infantile axonal neuropathy with respiratory failure
synonym(10): SIANRF
synonym(11): SMARD1
synonym(12): spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress
db-key(1)/db: GTR
db-key(1)/key: C1858517
db-key(2)/db: MeSH
db-key(2)/key: D014897
db-key(3)/db: OMIM
db-key(3)/key: 604320
db-key(4)/db: Orphanet
db-key(4)/key: 98920
db-key(5)/db: SNOMED CT
db-key(5)/key: 711483003
reviewed: 2013-01
published: 2018-04-17
